sysbuild: Add AP-Protect settings and documentation (#17836)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/security/ap_protect.rst

.. _app_approtect_ncs_lock:

Enabling software AP-Protect with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK`
=============================================================================

Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware enables the software access protection mechanism for SoCs of the nRF53 Series and the SoC revisions of the nRF52 Series that feature the hardware and software type of AP-Protect.

Enabling the Kconfig option writes the debugger register in the ``SystemInit()`` function to lock the access port protection at every boot.

> In addition to this, the UICR.APPROTECT register should be written as instructed in :ref:`app_approtect_uicr_approtect`.

Reviewer: There are still 2 occurrences of `UICR.APPROTECT` that could be put between backticks.

    This allows the debugger to be attached to the device.

    When using sysbuild, set the ``SB_CONFIG_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING`` sysbuild Kconfig option, which enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING` Kconfig option for all images.

.. _app_approtect_ncs_use_uicr:

Enabling software AP-Protect with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_USE_UICR`
=================================================================================

Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_USE_UICR` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware makes the software AP-Protect disabled by default.
This is the default setting in the |NCS|.

You can start debugging the firmware without additional steps needed.

.. _app_approtect_uicr_approtect:

Enabling hardware AP-Protect by locking the UICR.APPROTECT register
===================================================================

For the devices that are in a production environment, is highly recommended to lock the ``UICR.APPROTECT`` register to prevent unauthorized access to the device.
If the access port protection is configured this way, it cannot be disabled without erasing the flash memory.

.. note::

>     This is the only mechanism supported for the nRF52 Series and the nRF9160 devices that do not support hardware and software for AP-Protect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This is the only mechanism supported by the nRF52 Series and the nRF9160 devices that do not support both hardware and software AP-Protect.
```

To lock the ``UICR.APPROTECT`` register, complete the following steps:

.. code-block:: console

   nrfjprog --rbp ALL

This command enables the hardware AP-Protect (and Secure AP-Protect) and resets the device.

.. _app_secure_approtect:

Secure AP-Protect
=================

With :ref:`Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M) <ug_tfm>` comes :ref:`security by separation <app_boards_spe_nspe>`, enabling a Secure Processing Environment (SPE) that is isolated from the Non-Secure Processing Environment (NSPE).
TF-M is available for the nRF53 and nRF91 Series devices.

While AP-Protect blocks access to all CPU registers and memories, Secure AP-Protect limits the CPU access to the non-secure side only.
This allows debugging of the NSPE, while the SPE debugging is blocked.

The following Kconfig options for enabling Secure AP-Protect are available for the nRF91x1 and nRF53 Series devices:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USE_UICR`

> In addition, you can enable hardware Secure AP-Protect by setting the ``UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT`` register.

Reviewer: Link to the `app_secure_approtect_uicr_approtect` section?

.. note::
    For multi-image builds, this Kconfig option needs to be set for the first image (usually a bootloader).
    Otherwise, the software Secure AP-Protect will not be sufficient as the debugger can be attached to the SPE after the first image opens the software Secure AP-Protect with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USE_UICR` Kconfig option, which is the default value.

    When using sysbuild, set the sysbuild Kconfig option ``SB_CONFIG_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK``, which enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option for all images.

.. important::
    On the nRF91x1 Series devices, the register setting related to the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option does not persist in System ON IDLE mode.
    You must lock the ``UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT`` register to enable the hardware Secure AP-Protect mechanism as instructed in :ref:`app_secure_approtect_uicr_approtect`.

Enabling software Secure AP-Protect with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING`
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USE_UICR` Kconfig option to ``y`` disables the software Secure AP-Protect mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING` Kconfig option to ``y`` disables the software Secure AP-Protect mechanism.
```

Author: Well, this was a copy-paste issue, good catch.

> This option does not touch the mechanism and keeps it closed.

Reviewer: Closed how? What has closed it in that scenario?

Author: The AP-Protect and Secure AP-Protect start in a state where debugging is disabled, but can be later enabled. The user handling options leave it untouched.

Author: It is a bit complex.

By default, debugging is not disabled by hardware AP-Protect (UICR.APPROTECT).

Also by default, debugging is disabled by APPROTECT.DISABLE register (register name varies by device), which is then opened by (first image) in SystemInit() by writing open to it, if CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USE_UICR (default Kconfig) is set and UICR.APPROTECT is not set. 
If hardware AP-Protect is set by writing the UICR.APPROTECT, we also do not open the APPROTECT.DISABLE, but it does not really matter as hardware AP-Protect prevents debugger attachment.

Then we also have APPROTECT.LOCK register (register name varies by device), which is set by CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK Kconfig, which prevents the APPROTECT.DISABLE from being opened, until the device is booted.

Then we have Secure versions of these registers for some products.

Enabling AP-Protect with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK`
====================================================================

Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware enables the access protection mechanism for SoCs of the nRF53 Series and those SoCs of the nRF52 Series that feature the hardware and software type of AP-Protect.

The setting writes the debugger register in SystemInit() in order to lock the access port protection in every boot. In addition to this, the UICR.APPROTECT register should also be written as instructed in `app_approtect_uicr_approtect`_.

.. note::
    With multi-image builds, this setting needs to be set for the first image (usually a bootloader). Otherwise the AP-Protect will not be sufficient and debugger can be attached to the device.

>     With sysbuild, use the SB_CONFIG_APPROTECT_LOCK, which sets this for all the images.

Author: Now that I look at this again, would prefer the following: 

When using sysbuild, set the ``SB_CONFIG_APPROTECT_LOCK`` sysbuild Kconfig option, which enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option for all images.

.. important::

>     With nRF91x1 series devices, the registry setting related to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK` does not persist in System ON IDLE mode. You MUST lock the UICR.APPROTECT register to enable the AP-Protect mechanism as instructed in `app_approtect_uicr_approtect`_.

Author: @SeppoTakalo @anangl: Instead of this, I would rather have the hal to lock the UICR.APPROTECT for nRF91x1 devices, if this Kconfig is set. And we could document that instead. Same goes for CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK.

Reviewer 2: After thinking about this, maybe we should just document it.
As we now fix the documentation, then it means that the documentation is correct for most of the NCS releases. But if you instead fix the code, it might be that customer reading the documentation of new release might be miss-guided when they would use older SDK that does not lock automatically.

So I think it is best to leave the documentation like you suggest.

Author: I think that if we changed the code, we could add a comment:
"From NCS 2.8 onwards, the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK` locks the UICR.APPROTECT register in SystemInit and resets the device.".

But I am fine leaving this as documented at this point.

>     With nRF91x1 series devices, the registry setting related to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK` does not persist in System ON IDLE mode. You MUST lock the UICR.APPROTECT register to enable the AP-Protect mechanism as instructed in `app_approtect_uicr_approtect`_.

Reviewer 2: register.

UICR is a hardware register inside nRF chip.
So this Kconfig option talks about how it deals with that register.

Enabling AP-Protect with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK`
====================================================================

> Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware enables the access protection mechanism for SoCs of the nRF53 Series and those SoCs of the nRF52 Series that feature the hardware and software type of AP-Protect.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware enables the access protection mechanism for SoCs of the nRF53 Series and the SoC revisions of the nRF52 Series that feature the hardware and software type of AP-Protect.
```

> Enabling the Kconfig option writes the debugger register in the ``SystemInit()`` function to lock the access port protection in every boot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabling the Kconfig option writes the debugger register in the ``SystemInit()`` function to lock the access port protection at every boot.
```

In addition to this, the UICR.APPROTECT register should be written as instructed in :ref:`app_approtect_uicr_approtect`.

.. note::
    For multi-image builds, this Kconfig option needs to be set for the first image (usually a bootloader).

>     Otherwise, the AP-Protect will not be sufficient and the debugger can be attached to the device.

Reviewer: Why don't we just advise to use the newly-introduced sysbuild Kconfig options?

Author: We do it in the next sentence.

Author: Yes, we are still supporting the child-image builds as well.

>     Otherwise, the AP-Protect will not be sufficient and the debugger can be attached to the device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Otherwise, the application AP-Protect lock will not be sufficient and the debugger can be attached to the device.
```

Author: Should likely be:

```suggestion
    Otherwise, the software AP-Protect locking will not be sufficient and the debugger can be attached to the device.
```

Author: I was referring to the software part of the AP-Protect mechanism. Which can be done by any image.

It is also wrong to set this in MCUboot, if we have b0, so I would not mention application specifically.

Author: Not sure, if it is perfect, but it is better now.

>     When using sysbuild, set the ``SB_CONFIG_APPROTECT_LOCK`` sysbuild Kconfig option, which enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option for all images.

Reviewer 4: So if it only needs to be set on the first image with child/parent, why does it need setting on **every** image with sysbuild?

Author: This was in line what was done with SB_CONFIG_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING, which requires the Kconfig values to be set for all the images. Having this work similarly, is easier to understand and it is not harmful.

That said, if you want the sysbuild to only apply the Kconfig for the first image, I can change that.

Please comment if that is what you were after.

Reviewer 4: If it's not an issue then fine to leave it as-is

.. important::

>     On the nRF91x1 Series devices, the register setting related to Kconfig option :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK` does not persist in System ON IDLE mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    On the nRF91x1 Series devices, the register setting related to the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option does not persist in System ON IDLE mode.
```

>     You must lock the UICR.APPROTECT register to enable the AP-Protect mechanism as instructed in :ref:`app_approtect_uicr_approtect`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You must lock the ``UICR.APPROTECT`` register to enable the AP-Protect mechanism as instructed in :ref:`app_approtect_uicr_approtect`.
```

You can use this option for example to implement the authenticated debug and lock.
See the SoC or SiP hardware documentation for more information.

.. note::
    With multi-image builds, this setting needs to be set for all the images. The default value is to open the device, if the UICR.APPROTECT is not set. This will allow the debugger to be attached to the device.

>     With sysbuild, use the SB_CONFIG_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING, which sets this for all the images.

Author: When using sysbuild, set the ``SB_CONFIG_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING`` sysbuild Kconfig option, which enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING` Kconfig option for all images.

You can start debugging the firmware without additional steps needed.

.. _app_approtect_uicr_approtect:

Enabling AP-Protect by locking the UICR.APPROTECT
=================================================

For the devices in production, you are highly recommended to lock the UICR.APPROTECT register to prevent unauthorized access to the device. The access port protection configured in this way cannot be disabled without erasing the flash.

.. note::

>     This is the only mechanism supported for the nRF52 series and nRF9160 devices that do not have firmware support for AP-Protect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This is the only mechanism supported for the nRF52 series and nRF9160 devices that do not have software support for AP-Protect.
```

firmware->software as there is no FW running in nRF91 or nRF52 before the customer programs it with their own FW. The HW documentation talks about software support when locking the register.

To lock the UICR.APPROTECT register, follow these steps:

.. code-block:: console

   nrfjprog --rbp ALL

This command enables the AP-Protect (and Secure AP-Protect) and resets the device.

Secure AP-Protect
=================

With Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M) we have a Secure Processing Environment (SPE) that is isolated from the Non-Secure Processing Environment (NSPE). TF-M is available for the nRF53 and nRF91 Series devices.
While AP-Protect blocks access to all CPU registers and memories, Secure AP-Protect limits access to the CPU to only non-secure accesses.
This allows debugging of the NSPE, while SPE debugging is blocked.

The following Kconfig settings are available for nRF91x1 and nRF53 Series devices:

Enabling Secure AP-Protect with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK`

> ==================================================================================

Reviewer 5: Consider making it a subsection of Secure AP-Protect. And the following three sections as well.

Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware enables the secure access protection mechanism for SoCs of the nRF53 Series.

> The setting writes the secure debugger register in SystemInit() in order to lock the secure access port protection in every boot. In addition to this, the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT register should also be written as instructed in `app_secure_approtect_uicr_approtect`_.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Enabling this Kconfig option writes the secure debugger register in the ``SystemInit()`` function to lock the secure access port protection in every boot.
In addition to this, the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT register should be written as instructed in ref:`app_secure_approtect_uicr_approtect`.
```

> 
> .. note::
>     With multi-image builds, this setting needs to be set for the first image (usually a bootloader). Otherwise the secure AP-Protect will not be sufficient and debugger can be attached to the SPE.
>     With sysbuild, use the SB_CONFIG_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK, which sets this for all the images.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

.. note::
    For multi-image builds, this Kconfig option needs to be set for the first image (usually a bootloader).
    Otherwise, the Secure AP-Protect will not be sufficient and the debugger can be attached to the SPE.
    
    When using sysbuild, set the Kcofig option ``SB_CONFIG_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK``, which enables Secure AP-Protect for all images.
```

> .. important::
>     With nRF91x1 series devices, the registry setting related to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK` does not persist in System ON IDLE mode. You MUST lock the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT register to enable the secure AP-Protect mechanism as instructed in `app_secure_approtect_uicr_approtect`_.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
.. important::
    On the nRF91x1 Series devices, the registry setting related to Kconfig option :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK` does not persist in System ON IDLE mode.
    You must lock the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT register to enable the Secure AP-Protect mechanism as instructed in :ref:`app_secure_approtect_uicr_approtect`.
```

> Enabling secure AP-Protect with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Enabling Secure AP-Protect with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING`
```

===========================================================================================

> Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware allows you to handle the state of secure AP-Protect at a later stage.
> This option in fact does not touch the mechanism and keeps it closed.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware allows you to handle the state of the Secure AP-Protect mechanism at a later stage.
This option does not touch the mechanism and keeps it closed.
```

> You can use this option for example to implement the authenticated debug and lock of the SPE.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can for example use this option to implement an authenticated debug and lock of the SPE.
```

See the SoC or SiP hardware documentation for more information.

> .. note::
>     With multi-image builds, this setting needs to be set for all the images. The default value is to open the device, if the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT is not set. This will allow the debugger to be attached to the device.
>     With sysbuild, use the SB_CONFIG_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING, which sets this for all the images.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
.. note::
    For multi-image builds, this Kconfig option needs to be set for all images.
    The default value is to open the device if the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT is not set.
    This allows the debugger to be attached to the device.
    
    When using sysbuild, set the ``SB_CONFIG_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING`` Kconfig option, which enables Secure AP-Protect for all images.
```

Author: Again, change to sysbuild.

> Enabling secure AP-Protect with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_USE_UICR`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Enabling Secure AP-Protect with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_USE_UICR`
```

===============================================================================

> Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USE_UICR` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware makes the secure AP-Protect disabled by default.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USE_UICR` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware disables the Secure AP-Protect mechanism by default.
```

This is the default setting in the |NCS|.

You can start debugging the SPE without additional steps needed.

.. _app_secure_approtect_uicr_approtect:

> Enabling secure AP-Protect by locking the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT
> ==============================================================

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Enabling Secure AP-Protect by locking the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT register
=======================================================================
```

> To enable only the Secure AP-Protect, run the following command:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To enable only the Secure AP-Protect mechanism, run the following command:
```

.. note::

>     This is the only mechanism supported for the nRF9160 devices that do not have firmware support for secure AP-Protect.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    This is the only mechanism supported for the nRF9160 devices that do not have firmware support for Secure AP-Protect.
```

.. code-block:: console

   nrfjprog --rbp SECURE

> This command enables the secure AP-Protect and resets the device.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This command enables Secure AP-Protect and resets the device.
```

This option does not touch the mechanism and keeps it closed.

You can for example use this option to implement an authenticated debug and lock of the SPE.
See the SoC or SiP hardware documentation for more information.

.. note::
    For multi-image builds, this Kconfig option needs to be set for all images.
    The default value is to open the device if the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT is not set.
    This allows the debugger to be attached to the device.

    When using sysbuild, set the ``SB_CONFIG_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING`` sysbuild Kconfig option, which enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING` Kconfig option for all images.

Enabling Secure AP-Protect with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_USE_UICR`
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USE_UICR` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware disables the Secure AP-Protect mechanism by default.
This is the default setting in the |NCS|.

You can start debugging the SPE without additional steps needed.

.. _app_secure_approtect_uicr_approtect:

> Enabling secure AP-Protect by locking the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT register

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Enabling Secure AP-Protect by locking the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT register
```

You can start debugging the firmware without additional steps needed.

.. _app_approtect_uicr_approtect:

Enabling AP-Protect by locking the UICR.APPROTECT register
==========================================================

> For the devices that are in a production environment, you are highly recommended to lock the UICR.APPROTECT register to prevent unauthorized access to the device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For devices that are in a production environment, it is highly recommended to lock the ``UICR.APPROTECT`` register to prevent unauthorized access to the device.
```

If the access port protection is configured this way, it cannot be disabled without erasing the flash memory.

.. note::

>     This is the only mechanism supported for the nRF52 Series and the nRF9160 devices that do not have software support for AP-Protect.

Reviewer 3: I dont understand what this note is trying to tell me?
Can you clarify in this pr_comment then maybe we can find some more clear formulation

Author: Some of the nRF52 series and nRF9160 only support the UICR.APPROTECT for locking the debugging.

Others have registers such as:
APPROTECT.DISABLE, 
SECUREAPPROTECT.DISABLE, 
APPROTECT.FORCEPROTECTS 
SECUREAPPROTECT.FORCEPROTECT
(depending on the device)

These registers allow the debugging to be disabled by the above Kconfigs, without locking the UICR.APPROTECT.

Reviewer 3: Aha, like that. I forgot that the difference was "Hardware" and "Hardware and Software". While I should have remembered, I guess this simulates a user. How about this, to reuse the exact same wording as earlier on the page?
```suggestion
    This is the only mechanism supported for the nRF52 Series and the nRF9160 devices that do not support "Hardware and software" for AP-Protect.
```

Author: Added with a slight change.

To lock the UICR.APPROTECT register, complete the following steps:

.. code-block:: console

   nrfjprog --rbp ALL

This command enables the AP-Protect (and Secure AP-Protect) and resets the device.

.. _app_secure_approtect:

Secure AP-Protect
=================

> With Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M) comes :ref:`security by separation <app_boards_spe_nspe>`, enabling a Secure Processing Environment (SPE) that is isolated from the Non-Secure Processing Environment (NSPE).

Reviewer: Could be nice to have a link to some TF-M documentation page.

TF-M is available for the nRF53 and nRF91 Series devices.

> While AP-Protect blocks access to all CPU registers and memories, Secure AP-Protect limits the CPU access only for the non-secure accesses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While AP-Protect blocks access to all CPU registers and memories, Secure AP-Protect limits the CPU access to the non-secure side only.
```

This allows debugging of the NSPE, while the SPE debugging is blocked.

The following Kconfig options for enabling Secure AP-Protect are available for the nRF91x1 and nRF53 Series devices:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING`

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_USE_UICR`

Reviewer: Fail?
```suggestion
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USE_UICR`
```

> In addition, you can enable Secure AP-Protect by setting the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT register.

Reviewer 3: Is this something the user can do as an alternative? "In addition" sounds like they need to do both.
If they can choose, I suggest:
```suggestion
Alternatively, you can enable Secure AP-Protect by setting the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT register.
```

Author: No, it should be done in addition. The Kconfigs modify the debugger registers. UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT will close the debugging on hardware level. It cannot be reverted without erase all.

Reviewer 3: Good, then it is clear as is.

Reviewer: It's not quite clear to me. If this is needed for secure AP-Protect to be enabled properly, which is what this section is about, then I think the phrasing should be changed. For example to:
```suggestion
In addition, you must set the ``UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT`` register to enable Secure AP-Protect.
```

Enabling Secure AP-Protect with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK`
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware enables the secure access protection mechanism for SoCs of the nRF53 Series.

Reviewer: How about the 91? This Kconfig options doesn't depend on the SOC being a 53.

Author: Decided to skip that due to the issue illustrated in important-section.

Enabling this Kconfig option writes the secure debugger register in the ``SystemInit()`` function to lock the secure access port protection in every boot.

> In addition to this, the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT register should be written as instructed in ref:`app_secure_approtect_uicr_approtect`.

Reviewer 3: ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/24486ca8-87d2-4928-bdd1-cc78cf5fb9b4)
Missing ref

Author: I don't think that we should add a reference to our code base for this. How would you suggest that we proceed?

Reviewer 3: I do not mean the code-base. But look at the bottom of the screenshot, it says "ref:`app_secure_approtect_uicr_approtect`". This should compute to a link I think

Author: Ah, misunderstood. This refers to same: https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/17836#discussion_r1812324735

> In addition to this, the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT register should be written as instructed in ref:`app_secure_approtect_uicr_approtect`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In addition to this, the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT register should be written as instructed in :ref:`app_secure_approtect_uicr_approtect`.
```

.. note::
    For multi-image builds, this Kconfig option needs to be set for the first image (usually a bootloader).
    Otherwise, the Secure AP-Protect will not be sufficient and the debugger can be attached to the SPE.

>     When using sysbuild, set the sysbuild Kcofig option ``SB_CONFIG_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK``, which enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option for all images.

Reviewer 4: as above

>     When using sysbuild, set the sysbuild Kcofig option ``SB_CONFIG_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK``, which enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option for all images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When using sysbuild, set the sysbuild Kconfig option ``SB_CONFIG_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK``, which enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option for all images.
```

.. important::

>     On the nRF91x1 Series devices, the register setting related to Kconfig option :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK` does not persist in System ON IDLE mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    On the nRF91x1 Series devices, the register setting related to the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_LOCK` Kconfig option does not persist in System ON IDLE mode.
```

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware allows you to handle the state of the Secure AP-Protect mechanism at a later stage.
This option does not touch the mechanism and keeps it closed.

You can for example use this option to implement an authenticated debug and lock of the SPE.
See the SoC or SiP hardware documentation for more information.

.. note::
    For multi-image builds, this Kconfig option needs to be set for all images.
    The default value is to open the device if the UICR.SECUREAPPROTECT is not set.
    This allows the debugger to be attached to the device.

    When using sysbuild, set the ``SB_CONFIG_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING`` sysbuild Kconfig option, which enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USER_HANDLING` Kconfig option for all images.

Enabling Secure AP-Protect with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_APPROTECT_USE_UICR`
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USE_UICR` Kconfig option to ``y`` and compiling the firmware disables the Secure AP-Protect mechanism by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_SECURE_APPROTECT_USE_UICR` Kconfig option to ``y`` disables the Secure AP-Protect mechanism.
```
